W-21348100-gov-cloud-fips-140-support-kt (#65)
mulesoft/docs-govcloud: modules/ROOT/pages/gov-cloud-fips-140-3-support.adoc

> = FIPS 140-3 Compliance Support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= FIPS 140-3 Compliance Support in Government Cloud
```
Otherwise the name of the doc will be the same as the Mule runtime one.

ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
:keywords: fips, certifications, security, fips-140-3, government cloud

Configure Mule runtime engine (Mule) to run in a Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 140-3 certified environment in MuleSoft Government Cloud.

Mule doesn't run in FIPS security mode by default. To enable it, you must:

* Install a certified cryptography module in your Java environment.
* Adjust Mule runtime settings to run in FIPS security mode.

Follow the migration path that matches your scenario:

* <<migrate-fips1402-to-fips1403,Migrating Mule from FIPS 140-2 to FIPS 140-3>>
* <<migrate-non-fips-to-fips1403,Migrating Mule from Non-FIPS to FIPS 140-3>>

== Compatibility

FIPS 140-3 support in MuleSoft Government Cloud requires:

* Mule runtime engine 4.9 (Government Cloud supported version)
* Java 17 or later

> * FIPS license from the license `.zip` file provided by MuleSoft (the non-FIPS license is not valid for FIPS mode)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* FIPS license from the license `.zip` file provided by MuleSoft (the non-FIPS license isn't valid for FIPS mode)
```

If you are currently running Mule in FIPS 140-2 mode and want to move to FIPS 140-3, apply these cipher and configuration changes.

=== Cipher and Protocol Changes

* TLS and cipher suites: +
FIPS 140-3 requires support for TLS 1.3 and TLS 1.2. Earlier TLS versions aren't supported. Use only the FIPS 140-3 compliant cipher suites listed in the xref:#fips-140-3-compliant-cipher-suites[FIPS 140-3 Compliant Cipher Suites] section. Remove or replace any custom TLS or cipher configuration that references FIPS 140-2-only or non–FIPS 140-3 cipher suites.
* Configuration file: +
FIPS 140-3 uses the `$MULE_HOME/conf/tls-fips140-3.conf` file for TLS cipher configuration. Ensure your runtime uses this file and that you have removed or replaced references to any FIPS 140-2 TLS configuration file.

=== Security Provider and Java Configuration

* Bouncy Castle version: + 
Replace the FIPS 140-2 Bouncy Castle provider (typically 1.x FIPS) with Bouncy Castle 2.0.0 FIPS. Install the JARs listed in xref:#set_up_environment[Installing Bouncy Castle Security Provider] and update `java.security` to use `BouncyCastleFipsProvider` and `BouncyCastleJsseProvider` as shown there.

> * KeyManagerFactory and TrustManagerFactory: +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `KeyManagerFactory` and `TrustManagerFactory`: +
```

In `$JAVA_HOME/conf/security/java.security`, set:
+
----
ssl.KeyManagerFactory.algorithm=PKIX
ssl.TrustManagerFactory.algorithm=PKIX
----

=== Runtime Configuration (wrapper.conf)

* Security model: +
Change the Mule security model from FIPS 140-2 to FIPS 140-3:
+
----
# Enable FIPS 140-3 security mode (replace fips140-2)
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=-Dmule.security.model=fips140-3
----
* Approved-only mode: +
Add or ensure:
+
----
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=-Dorg.bouncycastle.fips.approved_only=true
----
* Java 17+ module access: +
Add:
+
----
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=--add-opens=java.base/sun.security.provider=org.bouncycastle.fips.core
----

=== Keystore Format

* BCFKS: +
FIPS 140-3 requires keystores and truststores in `BCFKS` format. If you are still using `PKCS12` or `JKS` from your FIPS 140-2 setup, convert them to `BCFKS` using the steps in xref:#fips-140-3-compliant-keystore-formats[FIPS 140-3 Compliant Keystore Formats]. Update all TLS contexts in your Mule apps to reference the new keystores and set `type="bcfks"`.

=== Connectors and Post-Migration

> * Use only connectors tagged as `fips-140-3-verified` in Anypoint Exchange. Replace or remove connectors that were only verified for FIPS 140-2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Use only connectors tagged as `fips-140-3-verified` in Anypoint Exchange. Replace or remove connectors that are only verified for FIPS 140-2.
```

* Restart Mule after all changes and confirm in startup logs that FIPS 140-3 security mode is enabled.

[[migrate-non-fips-to-fips1403]]
== Migrating from Non-FIPS to FIPS 140-3

> If you are running Mule in standard (non-FIPS) mode and need to move directly to FIPS 140-3, complete the following steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are running Mule in standard (non-FIPS) mode and need to move directly to FIPS 140-3, complete these steps.
```

=== Prerequisites

> * Mule runtime engine 4.9, Java 17 or later, and a FIPS license from the license `.zip` file provided by MuleSoft.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Mule runtime engine 4.9
* Java 17 or later
* A FIPS license from the license `.zip` file provided by MuleSoft.
```

. Configure Mule for FIPS 140-3 mode: +
  In `$MULE_HOME/conf/wrapper.conf`, add the properties described in xref:#running-mule-in-fips-security-mode[Running Mule in FIPS Security Mode] (`mule.security.model=fips140-3`, `org.bouncycastle.fips.approved_only=true`, and the `--add-opens` option). For Mule 4.9, set the keystore type explicitly:
+
----
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=-Dmule.keystore.type=BCFKS
----

. Convert keystores and truststores to BCFKS: +
  Standard Mule setups often use `PKCS12` or `JKS`. Convert all keystores and truststores used by your applications to `BCFKS` using the procedure in xref:#fips-140-3-compliant-keystore-formats[FIPS 140-3 Compliant Keystore Formats].

. Update TLS configuration in Mule apps: +
  In your Mule configuration files, update every `tls:context` to use the new BCFKS keystores and truststores with `type="bcfks"` as shown in xref:#fips-140-3-compliant-keystore-formats[FIPS 140-3 Compliant Keystore Formats].

. Remove non-compliant cipher and protocol usage: +

>   Don't configure custom cipher suites or TLS versions that are not FIPS 140-3 compliant. Rely on the default FIPS 140-3 cipher suites (see xref:#fips-140-3-compliant-cipher-suites[FIPS 140-3 Compliant Cipher Suites]) and ensure no connectors or custom code force non-approved algorithms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Don't configure custom cipher suites or TLS versions that aren't FIPS 140-3 compliant. Rely on the default FIPS 140-3 cipher suites (see xref:#fips-140-3-compliant-cipher-suites[FIPS 140-3 Compliant Cipher Suites]) and ensure no connectors or custom code force non-approved algorithms.
```

. Verify connector compliance: +

>   Only use connectors tagged as `fips-140-3-verified` in Anypoint Exchange. Replace or remove any connector that is not FIPS 140-3 verified (see xref:#connectors-compatibility[Connectors Compatibility]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Only use connectors tagged as `fips-140-3-verified` in Anypoint Exchange. Replace or remove any connector that isn't FIPS 140-3 verified (see xref:#connectors-compatibility[Connectors Compatibility]).
```

. Restart Mule and validate: +
  Save all changes, restart Mule, and confirm in startup logs that FIPS 140-3 security mode is enabled. Test connectivity and integrations that use TLS and cryptography.

[[set_up_environment]]
== Installing Bouncy Castle Security Provider

Mule runtime uses Bouncy Castle 2.0.0 as its FIPS 140-3 certified cryptography provider.

=== Installation Steps

These instructions show how to install and configure the Bouncy Castle security provider with Java 17 or later.

. Verify that you are using Java 17 or later and `JAVA_HOME` is set.

> . Download the Bouncy Castle 2.0.0 provider files from https://www.bouncycastle.org/fips-java/[the BouncyCastle website].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Download the Bouncy Castle 2.0.0 provider files from https://www.bouncycastle.org/fips-java/[the Bouncy Castle website].
```

security.provider.3=SUN
----
+
. Configure the key manager and trust manager algorithms in the same `java.security` file:
+
----
ssl.KeyManagerFactory.algorithm=PKIX
ssl.TrustManagerFactory.algorithm=PKIX
----

[[running-mule-in-fips-security-mode]]
== Running Mule in FIPS Security Mode

After installing the Bouncy Castle provider, configure Mule to run in FIPS 140-3 mode:

. Open your `wrapper.conf` file (located in `$MULE_HOME/conf`).
. Add these properties. Replace `<n>` with the next sequential number in your file:
+
----
# Enable FIPS 140-3 security mode
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=-Dmule.security.model=fips140-3

# Enable Bouncy Castle approved-only mode
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=-Dorg.bouncycastle.fips.approved_only=true

# Required for Java 17+ module access
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=--add-opens=java.base/sun.security.provider=org.bouncycastle.fips.core

# For Mule 4.9: set keystore type to BCFKS
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=-Dmule.keystore.type=BCFKS
----
+
. If you are using a clustered environment, also add the cluster encryption key:
+
----
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=-Dmule.cluster.network.encryption.key={your-encryption-key}
----
+

> For more information about clustering in FIPS mode, see the Mule runtime documentation on high-availability clusters and FIPS.

Reviewer: This is where you'll add the link to docs?

[IMPORTANT]
--
Not all connectors are FIPS 140-3 compliant. Only connectors tagged as `fips-140-3-verified` in Anypoint Exchange are certified for use in FIPS 140-3 environments. Always verify compliance in Exchange before deploying.
--

[[fips-140-3-compliant-cipher-suites]]
== FIPS 140-3 Compliant Cipher Suites

These cipher suites are enabled by default when running Mule in FIPS 140-3 mode. Use these when planning or validating migrations from FIPS 140-2 or non-FIPS runtimes.

=== TLS 1.3 Cipher Suites

* TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
* TLS_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
* TLS_AES_128_CCM_SHA256
* TLS_AES_128_CCM_8_SHA256

=== TLS 1.2 Cipher Suites

* TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
* TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
* TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
* TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
* TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
* TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA384
* TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA384
* TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA
* TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA
* TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA
* TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA

[NOTE]
--

> These cipher suites are configured in the `$MULE_HOME/conf/tls-fips140-3.conf` file. FIPS 140-3 requires support for TLS 1.3 and TLS 1.2. Earlier TLS versions are not supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These cipher suites are configured in the `$MULE_HOME/conf/tls-fips140-3.conf` file. FIPS 140-3 requires support for TLS 1.3 and TLS 1.2. Earlier TLS versions aren't supported.
```

--

[[fips-140-3-compliant-keystore-formats]]
== FIPS 140-3 Compliant Keystore Formats

> Keystores or truststores in Mule apps are often formatted as `PKCS12` or `JKS`. These formats are not FIPS compliant. For compliance, convert them to `BCFKS` format:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keystores or truststores in Mule apps are often formatted as `PKCS12` or `JKS`. These formats aren't FIPS compliant. For compliance, convert them to `BCFKS` format:
```

NEW_PASSWD="changeit"                     # Replace with the new keystore password

keytool -importkeystore \
 -providerclass org.bouncycastle.jcajce.provider.BouncyCastleFipsProvider \
 -providerpath ${BC_FIPS_JAR} \
 -srckeystore  ${OLD_KEYSTORE}   -srcstoretype JKS       -srcstorepass ${OLD_PASSWD} \
 -destkeystore ${NEW_KEYSTORE}   -deststoretype BCFKS    -deststorepass ${NEW_PASSWD}
----

[NOTE]
If the source keystore is `PKCS12`, set `-srcstoretype` to `PKCS12` in the `keytool` command.

[start=4]
. Update the TLS configuration in your Mule configuration file to use the new keystore or truststore:

----
<tls:context>
	<tls:key-store   type="bcfks" path="server.bcfks" password="changeit" keyPassword="changeit" alias="default" />
	<tls:trust-store type="bcfks" path="client.bcfks" password="changeit" />
</tls:context>
----

[[connectors-compatibility]]
== Connectors Compatibility

Only connectors tagged as `fips-140-3-verified` in Anypoint Exchange are certified for use in FIPS 140-3 environments. To check compliance in Exchange before deploying:

. Open Anypoint Exchange.
. Search for the connector.
. Check for the `fips-140-3-verified` tag.

== Tips and Limitations

> * Not all encryption schemes and signatures are FIPS 140-3 compliant. If your app uses a non-approved algorithm, you may see a runtime error such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Not all encryption schemes and signatures are FIPS 140-3 compliant. If your app uses a non-approved algorithm, you might see a runtime error such as:
```
